think about what Agape means Jesus comes
and he the the agapic way the most
excellent way as Paul says Agape says I
to the Roman people in the Roman Empire
we can take all the non-persons of the
Roman Empire all the women all the
children all the widows all the slaves
all the impoverished all the non-romans
and we can make them into persons
because we live the most excellent way
of agape and Agape is is the god power
that turns non-persons into persons and
it conquers the Roman Empire and that's
why and the whole ancient world and
that's why it conquers the Roman Empire
[Music]
right hello everybody um I'm have the
privilege today to speak yet again to
professor John Veri uh he's a repeat
guest on my show maybe more than anyone
else that's possible John and I have
been involved in a conversation now that
spans more than a decade we've been both
working assiduously in different ways on
defining the meaning crisis and also
exploring potential solutions to that
crisis and with some success I would say
and one of the things that we do in
today's conversation is to to continue
that dial and to delve more deeply into
what the meaning crisis signifies and
also what it means say in John's terms
that uh there's a new advent of the
Sacred and what that means what the
sacred means what a new advent might
look like what that means
philosophically what it means
scientifically and theologically for
that matter we spend a fair bit of time
as well discussing Peterson Academy
John's one of the lecturers there he's
done three courses for us which have
been very the first one is released it's
been very well received um and along
with pageo and and my work on the
Peterson Academy that's another place
where this meaning crisis at least in
principle is in the process of being
resolved and that God only knows what
that means uh but it it seems to be a
genuine phenomenon and so and phenomenon
that means to shine forth by the way and
and that does look genuine and so well
John and I had the opportunity to delve
more deeply into all of those issues and
that's great fun um that fun that's an
enthusiastic fun you know that's and
when that makes itself manifest in a
conversation you see that in itself is
something like the Advent of the Sacred
because a conversation that takes you
outside yourself and Beyond yourself and
into the future and up into the realm of
higher possibility is a manifestation of
the Sacred that's been characterized for
centuries as part of the process of the
logos and it's so useful and interesting
to understand that you can experience
that and that you do experience that
when you get caught up in in let's say
an exploratory conversation you know we
talked about other ways you can get
caught up in love and in in what in
raptured by Beauty but um The Thrill the
enthusiastic thrill of a conversation
that's transformative is a marker for
the emergence of something that the
world depends upon right and that's
something sacred and there it is
tangible as hell so that's a very useful
thing to know so join us so
good to see you again it's good to see
you too my friend we spent a lot of time
together this year on the tour in
particular a yeah yeah on the tour so
you got any thoughts about that about
the tour well I mean and the gospel
seminar too right well right right right
um The Gospel seminars was a very
profound experim experience for me um as
you know I was a little bit hesitant
because I don't consider myself a
Christian but you were extremely
welcoming you were good to your word as
you always have been with me um and of
course there was a lot people there that
I'm very fond of uh Douglas Hedley
Jonathan pjo Steven
Blackwood uh and I got became fond of
some people like Greg Horowitz and uh
and and so it was it was it I had a
really a really amazing time but uh yeah
well I'll give people the background on
that so um John came down to we tyed in
Nashville it was Nashville yeah yeah so
we did as as many of you watching and
listening know I did a seminar with a
group of people on Exodus that we
released a year ago on the daily wire
and it's become the most popular thing
they've done apart from what is a Woman
by Matt Walsh and it was quite a trip to
go through the Exodus story with a group
of eight Scholars I learned a ridiculous
amount and so we decided to duplicate
that procedurally with the gospels and
so we had many of the same crew yeah but
John came along for the gospel seminar
and that worked out very well that's
going to be released between now and
December by the way on the dailywire
platform and so they're very happy with
the way it's turned out and there
there'll be more images in it more
interviews and so it'll be a little pept
up on the editing side from The Exodus
seminar so why did you like the gospel
seminar um I'm not making a comparison
to The Exodus because because it wasn't
there but uh uh well I um as you as you
know I I I I I was brought up in a very
sort of fundamentalist Christianity so
i' I I I I've had a very slow at times
therapeutic you know reproach mom uh and
I I hope that came through in in my I
showed up at the gospel seminar oh
definitely um and
um and I came to uh I I came to uh like
sort of a a profound um this sounds like
a Hallmark card so I I know you won't
take it though but I came to a sort of
profound uh sort of reorientation reape
reape mention of Jesus of Nazareth um um
and this this may sound
uh I'm asking for charity the next thing
I'm going to say sure sure I I'd always
missed being a Christian in some sense
um and um I miss going to church I
missed the community I I miss that that
that sense of having a Mythos that you
belong to and a community and a
community yeah and um and and and so but
I'm trying to make this positive I lost
that longing at the gospel seminar not
because I became a Christian but because
I felt I came close well there was a
moment if you remember the gospel semar
where I said like I'm I'm I consider
myself a deep follower of the logos yeah
right and that became and and it was
that wasn't just a statement for me uh
like and because of the people that were
there and the and the way they received
it um i f i i i don't want to get too
overly uh egocentric but that was a very
healing moment for me well it's a it's a
remarkable thing to realize you know I
inter I interviewed had a discussion
with Elon Musk recently you know and he
had a very cataclysmic existential
crisis around 13 or 14 and you know musk
has a worldclass intellect so it's not
surprising that it happened to him early
and it had something to do with the
conflict between the scientific view of
the world the hypothetical conflict
between the scientific view of the world
and the religious View and it took him a
number of years to resolve that and I
think essentially the way he resolved
that was by realizing his identity with
the logos now that's not exactly how he
put it but then he didn't have the
benefit of the Gospel seminar for
example but what he discovered was that
he could find in intrinsic meaning in
life by pursuing the path of the
exploration of truth right that and I
don't think there is any real difference
between the logos and the pursuit of
Truth Now what that means theologically
well you could unpack that for Millennia
because human beings have been unpacking
it for Millennia but it is perfectly
reasonable and I think in keeping with
your work to point out that that
investigation into truth itself a is a
form of Truth Jean P said that is that
if we're going to understand knowledge
what we really want to understand is not
the structure of knowledge but the
process by which knowledge builds and is
regenerated right and so PJ figured that
out and to to follow that deep
commitment to the truth and that
continual exploration is identification
with the logos and and that certainly
characterizes your work and it's good to
put that back into context I mean I've
been struck too by the fact that you
know the Greeks I I released a series of
documentaries on The Daily wire as well
there the last one of four is coming out
this week I believe Jerusalem Athens and
Rome two in Jerusalem and one of the
things that's remarkable about the
conjunction of Greece and Jerusalem is
the Greeks posited the ex the existence
of a logos that was embedded essentially
in the material and corporeal world that
there was an intrinsic logic to things
that that the world itself was
comprehensible and that comprehending
the world was good and the Jews
essentially and the
Christians had an embodied logos idea
that the human being was a rational
creature and an exploratory creature and
that there was a match between that and
the world and that combination of Greece
and Jerusalem is one of the sources of
Western Civilization but it's very good
to be able to conceptualize the gospel
account in that manner because it well
it starts to put rationality and the
Mythos that you described back together
which is I think you know something of
cardinal importance for our and I think
it's what's occurring in our current
time thank you for saying that I think I
think that was very well articulated it
for me it
afforded um because the kind of Truth
we're talking about is existential truth
we're not talking about just
propositional truth right we're talking
about the truth that's only and P would
agree with this the kind of truth that
only is realized through personal
transformation um but and embodiment yes
of course and it was so Jesus of
Nazareth and Socrates could properly
dwell together within within me U right
well and and that that's kind of a
classic That's a classic Western View as
well I mean even even Dante put the
Greek philosophers in the uppermost
echelons of hell right I mean which was
a compliment in a in a fundamental way
martyr said that Socrates was a
Christian before Christ right right
right and and right and there's a well
and that was part of that juxtoposition
of Greece and Jerusalem right because
they it was evident that the same Spirit
was trying to make itself manifest in
two different ways you have two
different Notions of the logos that are
complimentary right the Greek notion is
this notion of gathering things together
so they belong together so they're
intelligible and then you have you have
the the the Hebrew notion of uh of the
logos as as as the way in which like the
way in which language and thought create
and make and and speak into existence of
course we do it in a very limited
fashion and then the idea is there's
some sort of ultimate uh aspect of that
and then they're they're they're they're
brought
together so we could start start by
talking
about
[Music]
depression depressed people are sad and
frustrated and disappointed they tend to
feel all negative emotions
simultaneously in a manner that's
paralyzing depression is fundamentally a
biochemical disorder one of the things I
tried to determine as a good behaviorist
was whether the person who was suffering
was suffering because they were ill in
the strictly physiological sense or
whether they were suffering from the
cumulative micro and macro catastrophes
of
Life the probability that tossing an
anti-depressant into the mix is all of a
sudden going to fix your life that are
absolutely catastrophically out of order
is zero the more unstable your life is
the less serotonin your brain produces
and that makes you hyper sensitive to
negative emotion and suppresses positive
emotion you take the problem I'm
suffering and then you think well why
are you suffering it's exposure therapy
and then you can practice encountering
the obstacles that are stopping you and
it'll make you braver and it'll help you
deal with your problems voluntary
confrontation with the forces of
darkness and chaos is the fundamental
story of life
well one of one of the things that I
wrote about I have a new book coming out
in November and I actually Drew somewhat
heavily on Richard Dawkins for parts of
the book we who wrestle with we who
wrestle with God I've read it of course
right of course of course and and
were're on the tour with me yeah and so
Dawkins makes a strong case and and
repeats it again in his newest book
which is just out that the an organism
any biological organism has to be a
microcosm of its environment has to be a
model so has to reflect the environment
at every level right from the from the
molecular all the way up priston says
the same thing Christ says you don't you
don't have a model you are a model right
right and and well that's exactly what I
guess Dawkins would say both you have a
model or you are a model and you have a
model and that would be particularly
true for people and well the fact that
you're a model and that you have a model
so that's the interior logos that might
be more associated with say
judeo-christian thought but it has to
match the external logos of the world
because otherwise so that otherwise it
makes it has no connection point but
that also begs a question which is one
of the questions I I raise in this book
is that if Dawkins is correct in that
supposition that an organism has to be a
microcosm of its environment and human
beings are embodied personalities at the
highest level of their organization then
how can it be otherwise than that the
human being as a personality is a
reflection of the of the what of the
essence of the cosmos let's say or
pretentious but well not pretentious I
mean it could be taken as pretentious or
you could reframe it as uh you know
there are are potentially there are
potentialities in reality that are only
actualized in our personhood and they
reflect and without us access to those
principles in reality would not would
not be available well that that seems to
be akin to something like emergence well
right me yeah very much you can think
about us is random like as the
consequence of random processes which I
think is a fairly absurd way of looking
at the evolutionary uh process but you
can also look at us as manifestations of
the potential that was inherent in the
material substrate right from the
beginning of time right and we we know
that these potentials exist because
while hydrogen and oxygen join to make
water and what that and so on up the
chain of complexity and what that seems
to indicate to me is that there's an
unrealized potential even in the
simplest of material forms that contains
within it well whatever possibility is
it's very difficult to Define but that
it isn't that that possibility makes
itself manifest in an entirely random
manner it it reflects something like an
implicate order in those lower order
material Properties or or properties so
you're turning in and and and this is a
great joy for me you're turning into a
neoplatonist because I mean you you you
have you have emergence up right right
but emergence up has to be constrained
there has to be an ordering to those
possibilities because of the possibil
this is a point even made by Whitehead
much later yeah it' be just chaotic
right right so you have em mergence up
and if you had em mergence up without
constraint down you'd the the top level
would just be an epip phenomena but the
top level as a level has to constrain
what's going and this is what this is in
the book I'm working on with Greg
Enriquez onc Consciousness that you not
only have bottom up emergence you have
top- down emanation yeah yeah and that's
the neoplatonic view that's and that's
the view that went into the heart that
seems to be the same view that pageo
holds I would say well of course he does
because he's an Eastern Orthodox
Christian and as we're going to say ne
Christian neoplatonism is at the core of
of people like Jonathan Paso and Bishop
Maximus yeah Eastern Orthodoxy like well
all of Christian mysticism is profoundly
influenced by uh by Greek neoplatonism
but especially Eastern Orthodox
Christianity yes very much yeah so I
really I really enjoyed the gospel
seminar I learned a lot it was it was
quite a uh it was quite a cognitive
effort to get through that in a week did
keep all that on track well thank God
for that I was I was pretty much out of
it for the next three weeks in
consequence but it was well well worth
it so and I uh I have a follow-up volume
to the book I'm going to publish in
November which is specifically on the
Book of Job and on the gospels and it
this seminar certainly helped me flesh
that out to a tremendous degree as well
I'm just in the writing now I'm just
getting to the story of the crucifixion
and Resurrection which is of course the
most complex and challenging part of
that entire narrative and so yeah I
remember when we were in the gospel that
was a that was that was yeah that was a
everybody was worried about that oh yeah
well we were all we were worried about
the seminar period about and but it but
I thought it I thought it went extremely
well and we were very happy to have you
there and I I mean everybody one of the
wonderful things about the Exodus
seminar and the gospel seminar
is that that logos Spirit Everybody
abided by that logo Spirit 100% of the
time because everybody was trying to
extend their knowledge instead of trying
to prove that they were right exactly
right and that's maybe that's something
like the opposite of that pharisaic
religious Pride that's often
conceptualized as the ultimate sin right
is that you know when you're trying to
hammer home your status because you're
right about something that's a
completely different game than trying to
build something together that expands
you both in the course of the
conversation I think I think the the
seminars were Flawless examples of that
everybody played extremely well together
despite very very very play music like
the way you play music yeah right
Socrates made a distinction between Pho
Sophia the love of wisdom and phon noia
the love of Victory and he said the
greatest thing that thwarts the love of
wisdom is the love of Victory I wonder
if there's any difference between the
love of Victory and the worship of
power um I mean most of the opponents
that Socrates is wrestling with are the
sophists and they are definitely
Advocates about for you know that
reality is power and that right having
power is what you're after they were
they were deeply Political Animals in
that in that fashion yes right yeah well
so one of the things I've wondered about
too in in recent years is so imagine
that there are different forms
of conceptualization and action that can
lead to something approximating a higher
order unity and power would be one
because you you can unify to some degree
with power I mean it produces a
counterposition because if you use power
on people they tend to Rebel but at
least for some periods of time you can
use command and force to to to bring
together but I I I have a sneaking
suspicion that it's much better to bring
people together in a unit under the ages
of something like the logos which is
that game of of genuine exploration and
self Transcendence but maybe you there
could be a corollary to that which would
be that if the if God dies if the God is
logos and it dies the deity that rises
to replace it is
power wow you you you you do what you
frequently do that's very pregnant with
a lot of possibilities um I mean first
of all that notion of dialogos by means
of a logos and I think that's something
we pract like we should practice and um
do a lot of work about trying to help
afford people being able to practice
that as an explicit practice um so I
think that's a very valuable thing to
say um I I I I think power I I think
power is one our one of our senses of
realness um I think and we need it um
you talk about this you talk about the
fact that we don't want to be
overwhelmed by anomaly we need to have
some power we need to be able to our
skills have to get a purchase on the
world right so yeah I'm thinking not so
much power that that's more of a nian
notion of power I would say a functional
I'm thinking more of compulsion right
like that I can force you to abide by
the dictates of okay this is better than
power with power as force not power so
much as as as reality exactly okay so
let's move to there because what's
really interesting is this and and and
talked about this in the the course on
the Peterson Academy the the the Primacy
of beauty you you got this really
interesting thing
because right you you want to like you
want reason to be compelling but
voluntarily yeah right right right right
the voluntarism is a crucial element
right but but you don't want it just be
arbitrary like no no reason compels me
we say things like that and we don't
think the person's insane we oh I get
what you mean that's a really good
argument and then and then you so you
and this is you know this is this goes
towards frankfurt's notion of
well reason is voluntary necessity but
then there's another thing that seems to
be voluntary necessity which which is
what his book is about reasons for love
love is a voluntary necessity it seems
like you're this is you're not you're
compelled but yet it seems to be totally
what you want to be doing and then if
you think about what love picks up that
might be something like the concordance
between calling and psyche well let me
let me let me let me pick up on that
because think about what love is often
this is a platonic argument love is
often a response to beauty and Beauty
has that same thing it it's kind of like
it calls you it's this voluntary
necessity you're struck by Beauty you're
compelled but you don't feel forced it's
that it's like right and so you've got
this this interlocking between reason
and love and beauty which I think I
wonder if that's something
like going online without expressvpn is
like leaving your keys in the car when
you run into the gas station most of the
time you're probably fine but what if
you come back to see someone driving off
with your car in today's digital age
your online privacy isn't just a luxury
it's a necessity every time you connect
to an unencrypted Network in a cafe
hotel or airport you're essentially
broadcasting your personal information
to anyone techsavvy enough to intercept
it and trust me it doesn't take a genius
hacker to do this with some cheap
Hardware even a precocious 12-year-old
could potentially access your passwords
Bank logins and credit card details now
you might think what's the big deal
who'd want my data anyway well on the
dark web your personal information could
fetch up to
$1,000 that's right there's a whole
underground economy built on Stolen
identities this is where expressvpn
comes in it's like a fortress for your
Digital Life creating an encrypted
tunnel between your device and the
internet their encryption is so robust
that it would take a hacker with a
supercomputer over a billion years to
crack it but don't let it power fool you
expressvpn is incredibly userfriendly
with just one click you're protected
across all your devices phones laptops
tablets you name it that's why I use
expressvpn whenever I'm traveling or
working from a coffee shop it gives me
peace of mind knowing that my research
Communications and personal data are
shielded from prying eyes secure your
online data today by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan that's e p s
vpn.com Jordan and you can get an extra
3 months free expressvpn.com
Jordan see you object to someone's
arbitrary imposition of compulsion over
you because they're this is one way of
looking at it is they're forcing you to
perceive and uh and and communicate and
to act in a manner that isn't in keeping
with the structure of your values right
so it it it strikes you as
counterproductive with regards to your
own aims let's say and and that produces
a sense of disharmony and Rebellion it
could be that the reason that beauty
beuty and love can be compelling without
being powerful in that compulsion way is
that they speak to something like an
emergent Harmony of value that's part
and parcel you might say of the Soul so
Beauty could compel you forward in part
because if you it it might be that if
you integrated your values
properly you would be naturally oriented
in consequence of the makeup of your
Soul towards those things that beauty
and love are pointing to right and and
and let's not remember Beauty and love
are also overlapping with reason and you
need reason because you have to care
about the right things to reason well
and yes you have to care about the right
things which implies that there are
right things to care about and so notice
what you're doing and and that goes back
to the microcosm macrocosm you know yeah
right is that moment where the principle
the grammar of my cognition and the
grammar of reality are calling to
they could could interpenetrate that's
right and you know I can't give you an
argument to prove that that's the case
because every argument presupposes that
in some sense the grammar of reason and
the grammar of reality must have some
deep Harmony and the same thing with
love and the same thing with beauty like
and these are profound ways in which I
think I think Faith well I think faith
is actually the willingness to posit the
reality of that truth in the absence of
final proof okay let's talk about that
because I think that's really important
because that's a different there's
different Notions of faith and what I
hear you saying I might be wrong what I
what I hear you saying is Faith is a
recognition of the power in the good
sense that we're talking about here this
fall the power of these primordial
presuppositions that are Central for
participating in the logos participating
in the true the good and the beal and
that's a different notion of Faith than
the assertion of belief without evidence
yes very very much so well this is
something that we concentrated quite a
bit on in the go semar because well this
is actually a problem that I have with
the Christian the classic what would you
say standard Christian Community well
now because the Christians are all
annoyed at me because I won't I don't I
haven't proclaimed my faith in the
propositional manner that many people
who've adopted a Creed would find would
require and so they're upset about that
and on my case and it it's I find it so
quite distasteful in some ways there's
an Invitational element but there's a
compulsion element and the compulsion
element is first of all the insistence
that the faith that's necessary to
define something like Christianity is
actually propositional now it should be
the case that your propositional content
is in alignment with your existential
commitments but for me the fundamental
move of faith is an existential move and
the danger in the propositional this is
the phic danger as far as I'm concerned
is that you substitute the propositional
for the for the for the existential
totally well and this goes you know I
talk about the four kinds of knowing the
propositional the procedural right the
perspectival and the participatory the
participate look when you look think
about the the two levels of of of the
you've had to you've gone from being a
model to perhaps having a representation
of it and then trying to capture that
model in
a set of proposition you're now two
steps removed from the actual knowing
that is you being the microcosmic model
of the macrocosm that's participatory
knowing that's the knowing that makes
all the other knowings possible and you
would would that be understanding no I
think I think I think all the kinds of
knowing have their own I think
understanding is a way of grasping the
significance of what you know and this
this is this isn't my idea this is sort
of pretty much uh a what almost
consensus view in the philosophy of
science because you're trying to
distinguish between when science is
generating knowledge versus when science
is generating understanding because
science will often say things that are
false in order to generate understanding
here's those here's the here's the atom
it looks like a solar system well no it
doesn't right not at all right here's
how Gas Works here's the ideal gas law
well there's no such ideal situations in
reality right Katherine elen writes
about this and true enough so true
enough yeah right right why do you do
this it's not that you don't care about
the truth it's that she calls them
felicitous fictions because what they're
trying to do is they're trying to get
you to properly Orient on the
significance of of what is known as
opposed to give you evidence for coming
to New beliefs and getting new knowledge
there's a difference there and and so I
think understanding and I I get I get
the illusion you know Faith seeking
understanding I I understand but I I
think they're a little bit different I
think you have these
primordial propositions that are your
primordial participation that make your
cognitive agency possible right and and
and then you you you I don't know what
to you you properly Orient and identify
with them and when you understand that
it's to step back and let them see how
those primordial propositions are
playing out what's the significance
landscape they're creating for you
that's what I think it means when that
that that seems to me to be Associated
too with this idea of higher order
ethical virtue so let let me walk
through this with you for a second and
tell me what you think well I've been
thinking more and more about General
Psychopathology as a failure of
maturation right so you mean like being
a psychopath is that what you well being
a psychopath is a good example of that
because 2-year-olds for example are
radically egocentric right they can't
play with others they can't they can't
occupy a shared mental space they can't
take turns uh there's some Proto sharing
that emerges but they're not
sophisticated for example at sharing
toys so the the typical 2-year-old and
some of them are much more like this
than others are pretty they're oriented
to the moment and they're oriented to
gratify the emotional or motivational
state or whim that possesses them in the
moment sure now what happens as they
mature say from 2 to four in particular
is they learn how to bring another party
into their their go directed space and
to unify their desires their whims their
motivational states with that of another
that's how they make a friend is that
what you mean by going up this hierarchy
yeah exactly exactly okay so now you can
imagine these primordial motivational
States and emotions and we kind of know
what the basic ones are they're they're
all qu they're all pointers fractionated
pointers in an upward Direction but the
upward Direction actually emerges as a
consequence of their interactions across
time but not only across time across
time in a social space and they weave
themselves together and this would be
something like Jacob's lad from the
bottom up they weave themselves together
so more and more things are taken into
account simultaneously and I think that
parallels cortical maturation in a in a
society let's say that properly
socializes children I don't think
there's anything arbitrary about it I
mean you and I have been able to have a
relationship
because of the pattern of interaction
that we fall into when we converse you
know you make an offering and then I
assess it and and incorporate it and
then I make an offering and you assess
it and incorporate it and we're able to
do that in a way that jointly gratifies
our desire to explore and integrate
right and that that is a cognitive act
and a embodied act but it's also
something that indicates our fundamental
concordance with each other at a level
that's more than merely personal right
you're doing something this is the
dialogus that you refer to right you're
making an offering that I'm accepting
and vice versa but we can do that in a
manner that makes both of us want to
continue the process and that's
definition that's not arit that's not
arbit that's not an arbitrary definition
of a moral interaction right it's very
practical it's like well and and it's
it's an optimistic Viewpoint too because
then you could say that the patterns of
action that most optimally facilitate
the desire to continue the patterns of
action are the in principle are Pointers
towards the most moral way of Behaving
right and that I think that's manifest
in something like play you know we know
there's a Maman play circuit so we're
actually adapted to having these happen
but and it's a fragile motivational
State because it can be disrupted by any
other motivation or emotion but play
seems to be an indicator that
that Harmony of emotion and
motivation oriented towards the future
and towards the maintenance of social
interaction is in is in play at the
moment and so and I don't think that
this seems to me to be a very powerful
argument against something like moral
relativism it's like no there are a very
finite number of ways that you can
pattern your dialogos let's say so that
both parties involved want to stay
involved in it over radically long
spaces of time and and and not just time
let's say also different domains of
inquiry you know and that's that's
there's nothing about that that isn't
highly constrained and orderly yeah this
is I mean this is very first of all I
think very highly of what you're saying
um it's convergent with a lot of things
that I also think highly of I mean this
is habermas's proposal of universal
pragmatics that there is in the very Act
of communication and he doesn't mean
simply um information exchange he means
in the very Act of dialogos which I I
agree with him is necessary for a
properly functioning Society let alone a
properly functioning
democracy ladies and Gentlemen let's
talk about something that matters your
well-being in a world where Traditional
Values are under siege it's crucial to
stay strong mentally and physically
enter responsible man a daily wire
Ventures company that understands what
it means to be a pillar of strength in
these challenging times they've created
the Emerson multivitamin not for the
faint of heart but for men who shoulder
their responsibilities with pride the
Emerson multivitamin contains 33 key
ingredients that work in harmony to
fortify your immune system sharpen your
mental acuity and maintain the strength
of your heart and muscles it's not just
a vitamin it's fuel for the culture
battles that we face every single day
and here's something to make you stand
just a little taller every Emerson
multivitamin is proudly made in the US
OFA no compromises no shortcuts just
pure American craftsmanship and now
listeners of this show have an exclusive
opportunity to invest in their health
and and values simultaneously take
advantage of responsible man's fall sale
visit responsible man.com and use code
Jordan to get 30% off your order plus an
additional $9 off your first order but
hurry because this deal won't last long
remember a resilient Society needs
resilient Men start your journey to
Better Health and a stronger America
with responsible man vitamins that's
responsible man.com code Jordan for 30%
off plus an additional $9 off your first
order responsible man because true
strength comes from within
that there are uh there are uh pragmatic
in the linguistic sense of pragmatic
there are pragmatic constraints that are
there that are constitutively necessary
in order for the dialogos that is person
making and culture making and Society
making to be present and there are
Universal principles now the products
like a conversation there are Universal
principles that doesn't mean the
products are Universal no the process
it's the processes it's like well and
you you added another layer to that
which is relevant with regards to
emergence because you know you could say
well we have to conduct ourselves in a
certain manner like all the participants
did let's say at the gospel seminar in
order for everyone to want to continue
the process in the highest possible
manner but then you could also say that
so that that works for you
psychologically because it's compelling
and interesting and it works for both of
us practically because we learn but then
as you expand the social
as you expand the size of the group that
that process is operating in you start
to see a concordance between the
operation of that dialogos and the
possibility of sophisticated complex
societies emerging that aren't
predicated on Power and I think that's
why we have for example in the United
States we have the First Amendment it's
because it's a recognition that
something like you have the right to
engagement in the dialogos not merely
because it's a right let's say because
you're made in the image of God or it's
a right because the state grants it it's
actually a right because it's a
necessary precondition for the
maintenance of the society as such and
that's not arbitrary it's like it works
for you it works for the people you're
immediately communicating with but it
also works to
stabilize Society across long spans of
time and to make it grow and so you
can't dispense with that without
bringing the whole hierarchy I want to
add to it y so and this goes to work I
I've done with Dan chappie and a whole
bunch of other people when you get
dialogical systems what you get you get
the possibility of you you get the
possibility of distributed cognition the
way the internet is distributed
computation and releases powers that no
where is the internet like right and
notice the problems we can solve with
the internet that we couldn't solve with
individual computers when you get the
right biological Machinery going you
also afford distributed cognition and
distributed cognition
gains access to
reality and can basically the argument
of the Austrian School of Economics
right with regards distributed systems
I've had I've had some very good
discussions with Robert breed around
that exactly about exactly that and you
know and I you know and Dan gpp we
talked we we did a thing about how the
NASA scientists do this they create
these diolog narrative practices in
order to move in order to coordinate Ed
cognition to move the Rovers around on
Mars right right right I remember I
remember you that saying that so you
taught a course for Peterson Academy
let's talk a little bit about your
experience first of all so as you
remember and you uh graciously said
recently in the Toronto Star interview
you know I offered you the possibility
of coming to teach for us about
absolutely anything you wanted to teach
about so walk us through the experience
and the course and then I'll update you
a little bit about the state of the art
with regard to this endeavor first of
all I want to thank the reporter the the
reporter reached out to me at the last
moment and said I'm going to do this and
I do you want to talk and I said I bet I
really do want to talk because I wanted
to be clear and I didn't I'm not
attributing anything to this person but
I get this I've been misquoted before
yeah right right and so and there's a
couple things I want and I was very
insistent on so I'm I'm happy that it
came out the way it came out um and so
um I just want to express the the as far
as I can tell the reporter was true to
their word and I think that's honorable
and when reporters are honorable we
should honor absolutely so that being
said um first of all uh let's talk about
the first course that's out right now
but I did I've done three for you right
right uh so the first one is uh uh
intelligence rationality wisdom uh and
spirituality right and it's already up
on the site yep and uh and I've I've got
feedback from some of your people that
it's getting very well received which
I'm very that's for sure uh I'm very
happy to hear that um so first of all
let's go going through the experience
pleased throughout all three times um I
don't know if I should mention any names
but like Vincent the person excellent
just fantastic your cruise are fantastic
super professional um gracious careful
competent con inviting inviting
welcoming constant checking with me
about my needs how can we improve this
how can we do this this right you know
and just good good glad you hear that
that's what that's what I said I I've
said consistently to everybody who asked
me about it very very professional um I
want to make clear what I made clear in
the interview you you know when you
reached out to me and you know and and
and I wrote you an email and I said you
know I don't consider myself a
conservative or a Christian do you want
me to on this and you said of course I
do I want you to and you were true to
your word you gave me absolute
intellectual autonomy I have had it
through every course said and I've said
this on video so I'm happy to say it
again I want you to teach the course
you've always wanted to teach Y and true
true to your word all the way through
for all of these courses so far I'm
proud genuinely proud of of all of the
courses I've done for great well we're
we're dead serious about that I mean my
intention in identifying people is that
I am bringing people to the platform
whose views I want to hear and I
actually want to hear them and so that
means that the constraints have to be
lifted it's like no I want to hear what
you have to say and so and it's such a
wonderful thing to be able to afford
people this possibility because you know
when you're teaching in a university you
have an approximation of that but you're
subject to a whole set of constraints
some of which are necessary and some of
which just are entirely arbitrary and
it's not helpful because you can't
wander where the spirit takes you follow
Loos exactly exactly and you need to be
able to do that and I think we I've
taught three courses for Peterson
Academy too and I I I certainly felt the
freedom that th this new format allows
and so I should bring you up to date a
little bit too so well so we we we we
launched our
pre-enrollment and it was really a way
of testing the system and to see first
of all if we could handle the user load
to test to see how people are responding
and uh to also assess whether we got the
price right and to assess the reaction
of the market all of that and so we
onboarded 30,000 people no kidding no
kidding so that was that exceeded our
expectations quite nicely and the price
point seems good and I could delve into
that a little bit because you know the
odd person says well why isn't it free
and I mean there's a bunch of answers to
that is one if it's free you're the
product and don't forget it second on
the social media side because it has a
sophisticated social media system
there's an open question about social
media platforms now you know if they're
free they're instantly invaded by Bad
actors right because your attention
isn't free so it's very valuable and so
you get hordes of trolls you get hordes
of bots you get like bad corporate
actors the whole thing can deteriorate
and what we are seeing and what we hoped
for was that a relatively stringent
price point so it's about $40 a month a
relatively stringent price point
eradicates 95% of the Bad actors right
so that's cool that's worth something
you know because you have to ask
yourself if you're going to use a social
media Network how much is it worth on an
ongoing daily basis like is it worth a
dollar a day because that's
approximately or do25 that's what we're
talking about is it worth that not to be
chronically annoyed by the pathology of
the system and I would say it's worth
something for that to be the case so and
people are pleased with the PR the
indications we've had so far is that
people would have paid more and still
been happy so I think we probably
undershot the market limit but I'm fine
with that that's that's that's perfectly
fine and now we've raised enough Capital
because we have in enough students to um
start doing the AI language translations
and so we should be able to translate
all of the courses into God only knows
how many languages eventually and that
technology is really coming along quite
nicely and we're going to Branch out so
that we'll have representatives in well
to begin with all the major countries in
the world and hopefully we can bring the
advantages of elite higher education to
anyone who wants it and I think we
actually have a crack at doing that so
it's quite and our system worked it
didn't there were some bugs and people
were quite patient while we worked
through them and the team worked very
hard to rectify them as soon as possible
but yeah I was your first course
recorded so yeah right right right right
right well congratulations on that too
so that's that's a good that's that's a
good thing so yeah I'm very excited
about it and uh we're working we have
jurisdictions that are interested in
working with us towards accreditation so
we're happy about that but we've also
found that probably
75% of the people on the platform aren't
interested in credit per se they're not
even necessarily interested in taking
the quizzes that are available
fundamentally they're there because they
want to learn lots of them for example
are older people um I wouldn't say that
the majority but you know lots of people
wanted to go to university and couldn't
and so we can provide them with an
extremely highquality University
experience and I I I suspected that
would be the case so that's gratifying
as well so yeah so the full launch is
September 9th right and uh that's when
you'll get your access and when you'll
be able to start interacting with
students on the social media platform
and on your course site as well so that
should be hopefully spent a fair bit of
time on the social media platform so far
and that's it's very positive place so
that's very good and it has all the
features of standard social
media system so I'm also kind of hoping
that you know for academically oriented
people maybe it'll be a replacement for
the other social media networks be who
knows he because a lot of those are
quite toxic very very I use Twitter a
lot and I learn a lot from Twitter but
my God it's a snake pit it's a terrible
snake pit I use it as minimally as I can
yeah well I can understand that I find
it's useful for me to do things like
identify podcast guests you know because
I can kind of see who's of the moment
and not only of the moment you know and
so it's worth waiting through a fair bit
of narcissistic toxicity to find the odd
gem you know and it's a pretty way of
keeping a breast with the dynamic shifts
of the political environment how much
that's useful is a different matter but
because I run this podcast that's
something I have to be I have to be on
top of that you know in order to stay
conversent with the
current well part of what you do in a
podcast is it speaks about the moment
and so you got to have a sense of what
that moment is For Better or For Worse
and
so yeah at least that's what I tell
myself when I'm on Twitter but this
might be a good well and we're also
hoping it'll work well for people to
establish social networks you know CU at
least you'll know that the people on the
platform are interested in ideas let's
say it'll be a great place for open
people to meet for
example attention men who still believe
in the American dream in a world gone
mad the Precision five from Jeremy's
Razer stands as a beacon of Sanity five
Blades of superior engineering offer a
shave as unshakable as your faith that
the nation's best days still lie ahead
experience an exceptionally smooth
remarkably close shave and a testament
to the fact that Merit still matters
stop giving your money to woke
corporations that hate you get Jeremy
risers Precision 5 instead available now
at Jeremy
rers.us who are in all three courses
well they they um I wanted I try not to
be too self- serving but they all found
it a very transformative experience yeah
but they did that they wanted to they
started really bonding with each other
because there was a shared journey and
there was a shared set of ideas there
was a shared discourse space yeah you
very much yeah well soon people will
have course centered chat rooms and
we're hoping that if we start to grow to
a large enough size that people will
start to spontaneously organize well you
can imagine meetups where people get
together to watch a lecture and to
discuss it you know there's there's no
reason to Outsource a fair bit of the
classroom organization let's say to the
students themselves and we're
also with an eye to the Future starting
to think out think things through like
well one one possibility that we've been
investigating are cruises specialized
cruises because well cruises All Things
Considered especially compared to the
cost of a of a say a private university
education cruises aren't that expensive
you know they're they're actually quite
quite remarkably inexpensive I I saw a
retired couple for example who booked 51
cruises back to back because it was far
cheaper than staying in an old folks
home and the service is a lot better
let's say so you know we we're going to
curate meetings for students so another
thing we've been thinking about doing is
having a you know a series of
conventions maybe a couple of times a
year in major uh in major population
centers where we could bring say 10
professors together and maybe 5,000
students and do a weekend of you know
nothing but learning and yeah yeah yeah
and I just can't see why you know with
some social events at night it seems to
me highly likely that this is possible
and I I also have a sneaking suspicion
that because of the rise of AI and the
fact that increasingly much of what we
see on the net won't be real that the
premium for in-person experiences is
going increase oh oh yeah yeah I think
you can see that now with while the tour
we were on for example exactly yeah when
what did you think of the tour what was
that like for how many time how many
days did you spend with me and was it
three or four I can't remember I think
it was four yeah I think it was four
yeah um I had a really good time uh and
um I enjoyed I I enjoyed our dinners you
and I got to reconnect on a more
personal level which I deeply
appreciated um uh I thought that I I
made I it was like touring with the
Rockstar um I've told people I'm I enjoy
touring with a rockstar I don't want to
be the rockar uh that's you can you can
have that um but I I I enjoyed it a lot
the staff was fantastic um um I
enjoyed there was electricity some some
places more than others um and then you
know you and I having it was really
powerful in the way we were talking
about earlier after you gave a talk and
that electricity was there and to um and
to and to sit with you and talk
afterwards or even before you you you
were gracious you would all let me to
sort of talk a little bit about who I
was before I introduced you and and and
feeling even that a little bit uh there
and a lot of people especially the last
one CU in the last one I was I I didn't
go back I actually booked in a hotel in
the right across from the convention
center and a lot of people were there
from the event and I got to talk to a
lot of them and and and there was a lot
of them that of course they were
expressing appreciation for you but a
lot of them were expressing a lot of
appreciation for me and my work and I
yeah that was very very uh very very
encouraging so I there was a lot about
it I I I enjoyed um like I said
um it was really good to have you there
to you know get to to what to provide a
um informed overview of what I had
presented because I'm presenting things
that are spontaneous and so it's very
good to and for the audience as well to
have that reflected and then criticized
in the proper yeah in the proper
critical sense because the proper
critical sense is separation of the
wheat from the chaff not derogation of
everything as chaff right and so it's
very very helpful for people to see that
modeled but also to have it happen and
so I thought we did a good job at that
yeah I think so oh yeah well it was fun
we'll we'll we'll we'll do it again yeah
it worked out real well it was good too
because I had you and Constantine kiss
and Jonathan Paso along and I've also
traveled with Douglas Murray and Rex
Murphy and so all of that that's all
been extremely good to have that second
party in there to third party in there
to interrogate right and to make a
different kind of connection with the
audience and if you'll allow me you uh
behind behind the curtain off camera you
treat your people very well and that
impressed me throughout uh you've risen
to quite a bit of influence and
notoriety and people have been Twisted
by that in certain ways and um I was
very impressed by how gracious you were
with your staff with your people how
kind you were you know what part of that
there's there's kind of
a what would you say I think that's an
important thing to note it it's an
important thing to watch for when you're
evaluating people that's what I was
doing oh yeah yeah yeah no I understand
that and it is it is a real marker for
that you know you know like I've
traveled with lots of people and you
learn very rapidly who kisses up and
kicks down which is not a testament to
the Integrity of their personality but
it's also a management style in a way
because we're
very selective
about who we hire but also who we keep
and so there isn't anybody
around at Peterson Academy or on my tour
who isn't doing a stellar and necessary
job so and I also understand that you
know like it's a very F Well you saw
it's a very fast-paced Enterprise to to
run a tour like that and many things can
go wrong especially if you're trying to
sustain it across multiple years like
it's a very unlikely Endeavor and so
everybody who is involved they're
they're given it 100% and I'm very
grateful for that and they make my life
a lot more straight forward in my wife's
life as well I saw you you know I saw
you delegating yeah without question
like and that's a marker too that that I
look for that in people I look for can
they delegate Authority can they trust
people to run with things and you were
basically to my mind you were managing
things from sort of 30,000 ft above
you're giving sort of General
orientation or I want and you'd have
specific things here and there but other
than that people would say we need to do
this we need to come here and you go
okay and you were just like well the
other Advantage I mean there's a bunch
of advantages to that as a managerial
style I mean the First Advantage is for
me it frees me up to concentrate on only
what's necessary so and I thought
through well what's necessary to for the
tour to work and to continue well it's
necessary that Tammy comes along with me
and that she has a role and that that
works okay so that has to be set up and
it is then it's necessary for me to get
there like no matter what right I have
to be there like an hour ahead period
and then I have to do a good job and
that's really the three things and so
everything else has been farmed out to
other people you know the hotel
Logistics the flights the the mo the
meals all of the scheduling of my days
other people take care of that and then
if they do that fully then I'm very
happy about that and they have something
that's really crucial to do and can take
pride in their work and are committed to
it and if they can't do that well then
we figure that out very quickly and say
look this you know this this isn't
working and it's just I learned this
even more intensely on the tour than
when I was supervising graduate students
there's more play in the system with
graduate students it's it's easier in a
way to not be quite as cut and dried
with your decision- making even though
that's not a good idea but on tour it's
like there's no room for mistakes
because it's too fast-paced you you
can't you can't mistreat any member of
the audience anybody whoever does that
is like no you can't do that that's once
do it again you're gone because I know
this for for example once you all the
people who come to these talks they want
to be there and in a way they've opened
themselves up right because it's a
hopeful Enterprise and hope is a
dangerous emotion because it can be
dashed and so they come there and
they're excited and maybe they meet me
and if I'm polite and welcoming and so
are my staff then they walk away even
enhanced in their hope and their trust
if there's a mistake there you know and
they get the cold shoulder or anybody's
rude they will never forget that never
and they will tell everyone and you
don't have to do that it's a very small
number of people that you do that to
before an Enterprise like the one we're
discussing craters like it's way faster
than you think because a disaffected
person can tell a thousand people and
quite effectively and so if you have a
hundred of them that's not so good you
make it sound as it is rational but
there are many athletes and celebrities
who have not learned this lesson yeah
and well the other thing you you realize
too I think is that you know first of
all one thing I'm acutely aware of is
that I could be out in public and people
could be throwing rocks at me like it
could have easily gone that way and so
you know and I've had a taste of that
more than now and then and the fact that
that isn't happening all the time that's
something to read remember and in fact
in I have the opposite of that pretty
much wherever I go I'm so fortunate
because people are very good to me
they're good to me in airports wherever
they meet me and I'm more than pleased
to return the favor and you know you're
asking for too much if you have a public
face and the benefits of that and you're
not also like thrilled that people are
responding to you in that positive
manner you said that to me multiple
times on the oh yeah
well you're a fool if you
don't if you're not continually
appreciative of that so and you know all
the people around me all my staff
they're all like that they're all
wonderful people good good good well I'm
glad to hear that let's talk
about what you're up to you you told me
when we were you're you're writing a
book and you're on sabatical in January
tell me what you're doing practically
and then what ideas you're trying to
flesh out like what on the intellectual
Horizon for you okay so uh so first big
news uh the book form of Awakening from
the meaning crisis is coming out uh uh
the 29th of this month so part one 400
and some pages so it's it's uh it's not
just like a a transcription from the
series it's a companion we've taken it
we've Rewritten it updated it uh We've
added figures references my great
writing partner Christopher Master Petro
has Rewritten entire sections um so he's
a co-author with me and then we how long
is it so the first book is like 400 and
something pages and the and the second
one will be probably something like that
and where can people get that well it is
it's going to be coming out uh you know
uh you'll be able to get it I think
instantly electronically on the 29th and
then print on demand thereafter on
Amazon I'll get you a copy if you want
yeah definitely okay and so why should
people purchase it and spend the time
with it what what is it that you're I
mean I
know you had a long history at the
University of Toronto of being an very
very popular professor and people
regarded your work as existentially
altering in the positive direction that
was very consistent I saw that for years
and that's a very difficult thing to
pull off it's very rare and so and so
and you've had the same impact on people
in the broader public sphere as well but
we should zero into that you know like
what do you think it is that you're
doing right and what is it that you have
to offer in general but also in in
relationship to this book well the book
the book uh is my best attempt to
there's two halves the first is sort of
the historical half the second half is
uh the sort of cognitive scientific half
it's my attempt to the first half is
like how did we what how did we get into
the meaning crisis what is it why why is
it and then the second half is what do
we mean by this meaning in life what's
the best cognitive science what do I do
I think
um I think I'm very good at integrating
material across right different
disciplines and looking for patterns and
looking for patterns and getting kind of
a synoptic integration and then also
making it clear how it has that kind of
existential import that you mentioned a
few minutes ago right so it's a
gathering yes from from multiple places
and then also a practical specification
so you and I are similar in that regard
I think and we were reacted to the in a
similar way at the University of Toronto
for that reason well I mean you you have
an acknowledgement in Awakening from the
meeting crisis as the person who
galvanized the public to the meaning
crisis explicit right well that's
another thing you do too though is that
you're you're you're you're very you
have a gift
for pointing to the problem of the
moment and then encapsulating it in an
articulate manner right I mean merely to
be able to Jonathan Paso did this quite
well in the Coursey is for Peterson
Academy too by the way because he he he
provides a encapsulated formulation of
nihilism and what it means and what it
signifies and then dispenses with it as
an existential necessity quite quickly
and elegantly which is a big deal to be
able to do that because it's a real
problem for people but you're
highlighting of the meaning crisis as a
phenomenon just that is helpful to
people in the same way often that
psychological diagnosis is helpful to
people like you know people will come in
to see a clinician and they think their
particular brand of existential
suffering is absolutely unique to them
yeah so then you say no no a it follows
this pattern and these are the limits
and so now it's in a box you know and
there's a bit of something that might be
dismaying about that because it's no fun
to be diagnosed but it's also no fun to
be the only member of a crazy Club
that's not a good thing but then you
also want to Ally that to a pathway
forward and you know for for you to be
able to
conceptualize the meaning crisis as an
existential situation and then also not
say or imply that that's hopeless and
that's the problem I have with
approaches like the selfish gene or the
oh more rationalistic atheist movement
it's like well no wonder you have a
meaning crisis because things are
meaningless there's that's I think the
fact that there is a meaning crisis is
actually evidence that evident that
things aren't meaningless I agree
because it's not a neutral State it's a
very
and and the more thoughtful atheists
like Alex a Conor that we both talk are
responding to that fact that you just
stated because I think it is a fact um
yeah I mean the most consistent feedback
I get from my students who watch it
online comments or my friends and
colleagues like Jonathan Pou or Paul
Vander Clay is I gave people a
conceptual vocabulary a theoretical
grammar they were able to take stuff
that was in Cate and like speak it and
understand it and share it and
communicate it and then connect it to
psychological ideas and theory and
philosophical ideas and ways of life and
see why ancient figures like Socrates
might actually be really relevant uh
right now um right that's another huge
Advantage is that you're you're taking
these ancient thinkers and you're
pointing
out how what how how they conceptualized
and what they knew is actually of great
practical utility in the moment this
this is something I also found extremely
useful for example in The Exodus seminar
because the Israelite soour in the
desert is the crisis of meaning they're
the same thing and so it's also very
useful to know that this death of God
phenomenon is not new it's a recurrent
theme in human history that a crisis of
meaning is a condition it's not a
permanent State and it's not a statement
about the nature of the world it's one
of the various ways you can be in the
world and it isn't it isn't the final
solution for those who are rationalistic
rational enough to see through let's say
the protective superstitions of religion
that's not a good way of thinking about
it it's not an accurate way of thinking
about it now you how did
you I pr presume and I know to some
degree that
your concern with the meaning crisis is
reflected in your personal experience
and so I'm kind of curious about how
that made itself manifest in your life
but also how it was that you came to
understand that there was a pathway
forward and how you're communicating
that um so as I said I was brought up in
a not only in the nuclear family but an
extended family with a very uh
fundamentalist kind of
Christianity um and only I would now say
I I wouldn't have said it then but
retrospectively looking back after
therapy by the way I did extended yian
therapy um that it was quite traumatic
some of the mo I think some of the most
horrific exper es of my life were uh
around that I I belong to um a version
of it that had a notion of the Rapture
and I came home once when I was 10 and
there was nobody home and that was a
very rare event first time it had
occurred to me I'd come home from school
and I was convinced that everybody had
been raptured I had been left behind
because I was clearly a sinner condemned
to the Antichrist and to hell and for a
10-year-old you can imagine how horrible
that is or I remember when I was reading
the Bible I came across the passages
that talk about the unforgivable sin
right and I was just Riven with anxiety
and my mother trying to help me um took
me to the pastor of the church and he
gave me the most platitudinous useless
and even as a 12-year-old I was able to
recognize right you're useless um so I I
was uh I was a fan of Science Fiction
because I was always intrigued by
speculative thought from very early on
and I read a book by Roger zasi called
Lord of Light that introduced me to
Buddhism and Hinduism and the power of
myth um and it opened me up and I
rejected Christianity and I became well
I became that uh that that person you
were criticizing earlier the the very
antagonistic atheist materialist yeah
well that's very that's a very standard
pattern of reaction and it it's it's I
mean I've seen that in the atheist
Community I mean there's two things that
make someone a committed atheist as far
as I can tell speaking generally one is
the r problem that you described you
know the inability to reconcile the
claims of Any Given Mythos with with say
the scientific Viewpoint or even with
the nihilistic or hedonistic Viewpoint
that's one thing but that's not enough
it's very frequently the case that
people who turn in the atheist direction
are traumatized by bad religious actors
of one form or another right phic type
oh yeah well it's a well you know Christ
himself was killed by the religious
Hypocrites essentially a lot in the yeah
well it's a cardinal part of the story
it's it's so interesting to see this is
the worst harm obviously in a sense the
worst harm is done by people who harness
the best possible ideas to the worst
possible I was very grateful that Dennis
was there because Dennis and Greg were
both continually holding us back from an
easy anti-Semitism that could come yeah
right right well that's another danger
of course or right or or or a casual
antithesis to any other Creed because
you see that within denominations as
well right it's not a good answer and
yeah it was very Illuminating to me to
uh to think more deeply through the
significance of the Pharisees and the
scribes and the lawyers you know the
lawyers are those in the gospel story
are those who use the law as a weapon
and boy there's plenty of them running
about at the moment the scribes are
basically academics who use their
intellect as a destru Force like the
postmodernists and then the Pharisees
are the religious Hypocrites and they're
the enemies of the logos right and yes
obviously obviously DC Shindler my
friend DC Schindler talks about myology
uh the hatred of the logos um which it's
a good word right so anyways I I uh I
left and I went through a a a a profound
personal meeting crisis deep nihilism um
how long for how long
uh for
about three or four years how and how
old were you when that happened so 15 to
like 18 right right well it's
interesting too and I would say
significant that you turn to science
fiction that definitely happened Elon
Musk too and it it happens to a lot of
smart rational people who lose their
religious connection and I think it's
because the science fiction contains the
emergence of a new methos right
especially the new wave that I was
reading people like Roger zasi I mean
Lord of Light is about a planet where
people have sort of mutated themselves
and done sort of hyper technology and
they've assumed the roles of the Hindu
Pantheon and so Hinduism and so this is
one of zaz's themes about the
relationship between myth and Science
and philosophy and religion and so I I
was deeply um you know interested in all
of this and then I got to University
heand does the same thing with uh
Stranger in a Strange Land right because
and it's so interesting because musk
named his AI grock after Valentine Smith
right and that's that's not accidental
you can see that Mythos re-entering the
engineering sphere in the guise of
Science Fiction it's it's not a
triviality so okay so so you got turned
onto philosophical and Theological ideas
I I took an intro to philosophy course
and we read the Republic and I met
Socrates ahuh and what did that do well
see the thing about
my upbringing is it had left a taste in
my mouth for the Transcendence uh you
know
uh missing a sage if I can put it that
way and then I met this figure of
Socrates who um made the logos come
alive and gave me a new way of
understanding rationality and made me a
way of understanding spirituality and
Transcendence um in a way that was
consonant with my burgeoning interest in
science and reason and and that right so
that that was a defragmentation process
profound profound that's why um I will
not
follow okay I will not follow any
religion any P any pseudo religious
ideology any political Vision that says
You must abandon your loyalty to
Socrates that's not going to happen for
me that's not going to happen for me and
okay and so what was it specifically
about Socrates that attracted you do you
think well there was a lot originally I
thought
but but that's but see Socrates talked
about that himself he talked about how
he seduced people into philosophy right
because at first it was oh look he wins
all the arguments yeah right and you
know when you're first year student and
you're coming out of high school in the
meeting crisis right that that's very
appealing because then you can you know
it's but then you realize the people
he's defeating are the sopus are the
people who are after the the phon nikea
not philosophia and then you realize
that he criticizes him himself as much
as he CR and you get drawn into this and
you get caught up in this process of
self-correcting and self transcending
and doing it with other people
dialogically getting caught up in like
you know Jesus talking so that that's is
there is there is there something about
the essence of higher order meaning that
is uh either analogous to or identical
with
self-correction I think uh well I think
that's the axio revolution the axio
revolution right when people like sidart
or people like Socrates is the
recognition that our meaning making
Machinery is actually also
simultaneously the source of a lot of
our suffering uh and and that and that
simultaneously empowers us and but
challenges us because it I mean I mean
you think about the dapa you know the
mind is the beginning of everything and
if you don't if you don't if like your
best the greatest Ally you can have is
your is your mind but the greatest enemy
you can have is your mind right and that
and so you get this tremendous because
questioning improves but it also
destroys right exactly and so you need a
figure that is like Socrates you know
he's open to following the logos wisdom
begins in Wonder but there's tremendous
courage he demonstrates it unto death he
demonstrates it unto death this is
tremendously encouraging for that was
tremendously encouraging for me and so I
got caught up in this and then I wanted
to follow this except academic
philosophy at the time after first year
stops talking about wisdom and the love
of wisdom and you get into all of these
arguments about meta ethics and meta you
know epistemology and those are useful
tools you I I they're useful for Science
and so I kept going on for that reason
but this hunger was not being satisfied
so literally down the street for me
there was a TA Chi Meditation Center so
I went there because I decided to give
Eastern philosophy because I've been
reading some Herman Hessa a chance and I
started doing practicing Tai chian and
practicing the pastan meta I was
introduced to l i was introduced to
sarta and so these things opened me up
and around that time I was started to
read Pierre Hado and how our ancient
philosophy the stoics and and the
epicurian and the neoplatonist and the
Skeptics they also practice philosophy
as a way of life and then I started to
realize how much this
overlapped with early Christianity and
some forms of existing Christianity it
started to help me a Repro to
Christianity and to religion because I
became very I became very well you've
always you've always struck me at your
core as a as a religious
thinker I mean and that's part because
you're grappling with deep ideas and and
that's the same thing but you're you're
right and and um it's one of the things
that distinguished you from say the
other professors that while they were at
the University of Toronto but the
professorate in general and I also think
it accounts to some degree for your
impact on students I I think that's true
my
uh around this when I when I the episode
I did for awakening to the meeting
crisis on Agape I had Christians
Christian ministers like Paul Vander
clay said that was one of the best
presentations of
agape and and and then and Define that
for
everyone so other than sort of desire
there's three kinds of Love AOS is the
love that is accomplished by
consummation so in and I don't mean this
in some creepy Fring sense but I can
have AOS for a cookie cu I become one
with the Cookie by eating it and we
consummate a marriage right and you
consummate a relationship in you know in
sexual intercourse and then there's FIA
and this is the love that is born out of
reciprocity this is friendship love this
is the love that emerges and affords
dialogos that's why it's FIA Sophia it's
the dialogical love of wisdom together
and then there is the love that a parent
has for a child you don't love a child
because you want to be one with a child
that's exactly the wrong project you're
trying to make the project autonomous
from you and of course your child isn't
your friend when you bring the child
home from the hospital they can't do
anything they're not even a cognitive
agent they're a moral person but they're
not a cognitive agent you love a child
it's like this Magic by you love them
because by loving them you turn them
into a fullblown cognitive agent it's
it's like if I could stare at a sofa and
turn it into a Ferrari it's that kind
and and and and in that sense it is the
most fundamentally profound creative
engage and we and we're create like
we're we're not just creating meaning
we're creating the beings that
participate in meaning that as you
indicated earlier could disclose some of
the most fun because they're at the Apex
of emergence right that they can
disclose some of the most fundamental
aspects of reality so agapa is the Deep
recognition of that in that sort of
voluntary necessity and being compelled
to draw into it and Jesus Is Right Jesus
you know the Epistle of John God is
agape Jesus is the the the the sage of
that think about what Agape means Jesus
comes and he the the agapic way the most
excellent way as Paul says Agape says I
to the Roman people in the Roman Empire
we can take all the persons of the Roman
Empire all the women all the children
all the widows all the slaves all the
impoverished all the non-romans and we
can make them into persons because we
live the most excellent way of agape and
Agape is is the god power that turns
non-persons into persons and that
conquers the Roman Empire and that's why
and the whole ancient world and that's
why it conquers the Roman Empire right
and and and precisely and and so and and
my partner saw who's not a Christian
right and and I don't profess to be one
but she she she took me aside at one
point and she
said and I want this understood that I'm
saying this at an arms length okay and
you're a good friend so you'll you I'll
Trust you for that but she said you're
actually the only real Christian I've
ever
met what did she mean by that and well I
of course I asked her yeah right and she
said because you you know she she said I
get it you don't identify with a set of
doctrines but you you try to live agap
agape and you try to follow embody and
you try to follow the logos and you and
you've structured your whole your whole
life and the cultivation of your
character around that and you well
that's what belief that's that's believe
to give your heart to that's what that's
the original to stake your life on it
that's that's why I have a certain
amount of problem with the propositional
the reduction of belief the proposition
propositional tyranny that's that's what
it is well it's also you know it's
propositional tyranny but it's also
substitute it's a substitution it's like
well now I've got the propositions down
you know and I talked to some
evangelists in in Washington I know some
some very very wise evangelicals in
Washington um they do remarkable work
they're involved in the prayer breakfast
there and and have been for decades
really committed people and we were
having a very serious conversation one
day about the errors let's say of the
Evangelical movement one of them being
the substitution of the propositional
for the existential and then the
counting of souls you know the number of
people who accept the propositional
Creed which isn't nothing you know it's
necessary but it's not it's also it's
also maybe one way that the
propositional can echo down through the
emotions and the motivations and become
something embodied but that's a there's
a large Journey from the purely
propositional let's say the Apo apoc the
Apostles Creed to actually embodying
there are so many we we mentioned this
earlier this is p this is Socrates this
is Plato through and through there are
truths that are only disclosed to you
after you go through fundamental
transformation and that is different
from assenting to a proposition because
you have been convinced of its truth
that it's a very different see this is
the cartisian problem the cartisian
project is here's a universal method
that does not require you to undergo
existential transformation you just
apply the universal method it will give
you access to all the universal
propositional truths and that's all we
need and that is a big mistake this is
why I practice a form of cognitive
science that emphasizes that I have a
new paper out I think I sh shared it
with you why relevance realization is
not computational because ultimately you
can't capture all of that relevance
realization all that binding all that
transformation all that meaning making
in a formal set of propositions it's
just not going to it's not going to do
it for you right right right right so
yeah yeah well that's an extension of
the argument that the propositional
isn't sufficient yes right okay so now
personally um you wandered through the
gospel seminars with us and you you've
been investigating the idea of the logos
and you've been doing that from a
cognitive science and a philosophical
perspective and psychological and and a
psychological perspective and you've had
Yi and Psychotherapy as well so you're
interested in the narrative end of that
what has that done to your understanding
of Christianity and and I mean this in
two ways intellectually yeah but also
personally I'll do the personally first
yeah although it Bears on the it Bears
on the intellectual so I've I've in I'm
very cautious of the fact that I
shouldn't ever come to the conclusion
that my intellectual or philosophical
assessment is somehow swinging free of
my idiosyncratic bias that has come from
my own personal background right right
okay so
that's why I have and and and sincerely
by the way and with affection especially
for a lot of people like Jonathan and
Paul I I I I take a ve and I think I
showed it in the gospel seminar I have a
de I showed it to Bishop baram for
example yeah definitely definitely very
not even more than respectful I'm open
I'm listening I want to hear right so
but on the personal like I said uh it
what it did for me is it it's almost
like you know ker guard's thing
I realized I'm not going to ever return
to Christendom but maybe
I've and and I don't mean to be
offensive to any Christians here I'm
trying to H answer your question
honestly but I found a way to follow the
logos towards agape and towards wisdom
and towards Ultimate Reality and I and I
mean in a sacred sense that's you know
ultimately real ultimately
transformative ultimately onon normative
you know the most real and the most
relevant
um God if you would um all of that a and
that's what my new series is going to be
about that has that has become very
powerful for me so well I think I think
what we'll do for everybody watching
listening I think we'll continue this
thread of conversation on The Daily wire
side because and this is what we're
going to discuss and maybe this will be
an enticement to you as well to join us
there um whatever you're doing is very
similar to what Paul Vander is trying to
do it's very similar to what Bishop
Baron is trying to do Jonathan and
Jonathan yeah it's similar to what Ian
hery Ali Ferguson are doing yeah yeah so
there's something emerging and part of
the reason I'm really excited about
Peterson academy by the way is because I
think that we can at least in part make
it a center of whatever this is I'll
tell you Jordan I came to the gospel
seminar and I did the Peterson things
because I have and I talked about this
with my crew I have a sense that the ad
that that's a place where the Advent of
the Sacred can be occurring right right
right well that's the hope that's the
hope and it it and so what I want to
talk to you about on The Daily wire side
is I want to delve more into this idea
that you just laid out in a way of a
logos track that's parallel because and
maybe we could do that by referring to
the Grand Inquisitor in in in the
brothers Camis off as long as we put it
with Notes from Underground which I just
taught for a course I did a course on
literature in the meeting crisis and so
I that you use notes yeah well good okay
we can pull that in too that might be an
interesting book to do a course on
that's one we could do together you know
I that would be fun I I did a course on
Moby Dick Heart of Darkness Notes from
Underground death and Venice and the
plague one course one course oh yeah
that's fun that's fun all right so
everybody watching and listening you can
join us on the daily wi side and that's
where we're going to go to investigate
whatever this new advent of the sacred
because I think that is what's happening
um what we're going to delve into more
into what that means especially with
regards to its relationship to let's say
institutionalized religion
because the advantage to
institutionalized religion is that it
does preserve the tradition and and you
need that yeah well and something
preserved can be static and even rotten
to some degree but that doesn't mean
that you see this was the problem with
Timothy ly in some ways right tune in
turn on drop out it's like yeah that's
all well and good and now you're a free
spirit but that's not something that's
going to last Through the Ages it's not
going to socialize and structure people
so I talk I use a biological metaphor
that's also important in forai
acceptation uh the tongue has been
exapted for speech many organisms have
tongues but they don't speech right they
don't speak Evolution doesn't have to
make things from scratch they're right
exactly exactly and we I would say that
part of what the Advent of the Sacred
because that's what it's done in the
past it calls us to EXA the past not
just not just repeat it but okay yes
take it but find repurpose it draw out
from it induce from it okay that's
exactly what we'll talk about when we go
to the Daily wi side so everybody
watching and listening thank you very
much um what's the summation well um I
would recommend if you're interested in
this sort of thing um check out Peterson
Academy check out John verve's courses
check out Jonathan Paso's courses my
courses they definitely make a tight
unit and there are other thinkers on the
site whose thought is what would you say
well sometimes opposed to that I invited
Richard Dawkins by the way to lecture
for us so you know and we don't
necessarily see eye eye on everything to
say the least so but there is a
developing consensus around the kinds of
issues that John is bringing up and I
think you can be most rapidly perhaps
you can be most rapidly exposed to what
that is on the Peterson Academy site so
if you're interested in that well you
know give it some thought because it
might be worth your time otherwise you
can join us on the daily wire side and
we'll delve more deeply into while the
relationship between meaning seeking
let's say and meaning preservation and
what that means for the present moment
and how we
might contemplate revivifying our past
traditions in a manner that makes them
alive again so that we have the
advantages of exploration and of
preservation so we'll delve into that
more deeply on The Daily wire side join
us
[Music]